Evaluating a data space inversion surrogate model for predictive 
uncertainty quantification in a coupled SWAT + gwflow model
Ehsan Qasemipour a,*
, Wesley Kitlasten b
, Ryan T. Bailey c, Markus Pahlow a
,  
Thomas A. Cochrane a
a Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Canterbury, New Zealand
b Earth Sciences New Zealand, Taupo, New Zealand
c Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Colorado State University, USA
A R T I C L E  I N F O
This manuscript was handled by Andras Bar­
dossy, with the assistance of Basant Yadav, 
Associate Editor
Keywords:
Data space inversion
Uncertainty quantification
Data worth analysis
SWAT+
gwflow
A B S T R A C T
Incorporating measured data into environmental simulation models through calibration helps to improve pre­
dictive performance and reduce uncertainty. Traditionally, this process involves transferring information from 
observations to parameters, requiring many model runs and parameter updates. The relationships between ob­
servations (simulated equivalents) and parameters are often non-linear, which can compromise predictions. Data 
space inversion (DSI) explores the posterior predictive distribution by building a surrogate model based on the 
covariance between model outputs that correspond to 1) field measurements, and 2) predictions of interest. DSI 
avoids updating physical model parameters by conditioning predictions on measurements of system behaviour. 
DSI is applied to the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT + ) coupled with a modified groundwater flow 
module (gwflow) for the Winnebago watershed (U.S.) to evaluate its robustness and efficiency in predicting 
streamflow and groundwater and to quantify associated uncertainty. The coupling with gwflow enables spatially 
distributed simulation of groundwater heads using cell-based aquifer properties, allowing increased parame­
terisation complexity compared to SWAT + alone and providing a rigorous test case for DSI. The DSI-based 
model predicted streamflow and groundwater head comparably to the physical model, based on acceptable 
model performance metrics. The DSI-based model enables computationally efficient analysis based on re­
lationships between measurements and predictions, making it a practical tool for uncertainty assessment. Unlike 
the uncertainty bounds derived from the posterior ensemble of the physically-based model (quantified using 
iterative ensemble method), the DSI-based model’s uncertainty bounds captured observed groundwater head 
values during both calibration and prediction periods, highlighting its potential for decision-support modelling.
1. Introduction
Hydrological models are increasingly used to simulate a wide range 
of surface and sub-surface fluxes across a wide range of spatial and 
temporal scales, environmental conditions, land management practices, 
and climate scenarios (Bailey et al., 2022; Bhattacharjee et al., 2024; 
Kirschbaum and Watt, 2011; Zhang et al., 2024). Accurately repre­
senting complex hydrologic processes, while preserving spatial con­
nectivity and incorporating detailed management practices remains 
computationally challenging, even with the increased efficiency of new 
uncertainty quantification methods such as ensemble-based approaches 
(Chen and Oliver, 2013; White, 2018), which can accommodate large 
numbers of parameters. Moreover, the theoretical and practical 
limitations underlying the assumptions of ensemble-based methods 
along with the stochastic nature of parameter fields can lead to com­
promises in the model structure, parameterisation, or process 
complexity (Delottier et al., 2023).
Groundwater and surface water are two integral and interconnected 
components of the hydrologic system (Fleckenstein et al., 2010; Xiao 
et al., 2024). The connection between groundwater and surface water 
bodies like rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands (Winter, 1999), depends 
on hydrological characteristics of a watershed and also the climatic 
conditions (Ntona et al., 2022). This necessitates the quantification of 
both components when it comes to evaluating the anthropogenic and/or 
climate change impacts of one upon another (Lewandowski et al., 2020). 
Furthermore, adequately capturing uncertainty in these complex 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ehsan.qasemipour@pg.canterbury.ac.nz (E. Qasemipour). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Hydrology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhydrol
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.135028
Received 28 July 2025; Received in revised form 9 January 2026; Accepted 24 January 2026  
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
Available online 29 January 2026 
0022-1694/© 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
systems requires detailed representation of management practices. This 
requirement is further heightened when modelling objectives involve, 
for example, comparing the relative importance of one head observation 
against another potential location for predicting stream-aquifer in­
teractions. In such cases, the parameterisation scheme must be 
commensurate with the resolution and configuration of the observation 
network under evaluation to yield meaningful insights, even if the 
prediction itself could, in principle, be reasonably approximated using a 
coarser parameterisation.
However, the high degree of complexity in some models is often 
associated with extended computational times and an increased risk of 
numerical instability. Despite advances in computational efficiency 
offered by ensemble-based uncertainty quantification methods (Chen & 
Oliver, 2013; White, 2018), accurately simulating complex hydrological 
processes remains a challenge. Moreover, the theoretical and practical 
limitations inherent in the assumptions of ensemble-based methods, 
model numerical instability, and the stochasticity of parameter fields 
can compromise model predictions (Delottier et al., 2023).
The main objective of this study is to assess the effectiveness of the 
data space inversion (DSI) approach (Sun & Durlofsky, 2017) in pre­
dicting streamflow and groundwater heads in an integrated surface 
water – groundwater system. DSI relies on the covariance between the 
historical field measurements and future predictions of interest to 
directly sample the posterior distribution of model predictions without 
the need to adjust model parameters (Lima et al., 2020). By constructing 
a fast surrogate model from ensembles of complex model realisations, 
DSI avoids repeatedly running models with long run times, potential 
numerical instability, and non-linear relationships between parameters, 
observations and predictions to make predictions of future system 
behaviour.
In this study, we apply DSI to the Soil and Water Assessment Tool 
(SWAT + ) coupled with an advanced groundwater flow (gwflow) 
module. The SWAT + model is widely used internationally to represent 
surface – groundwater interactions in terms of both water quality and 
quantity, supporting complex parameterisation, thereby offering a 
rigorous and transferable test case for assessing the abilities of DSI in 
simulating any predictions that the model can make, extending its use 
beyond groundwater-only systems reported in the literature (Delottier 
et al., 2023; Kitlasten et al., 2025). The source code of the gwflow module 
has been modified to enable a cell-based parameterisation approach 
instead of the broader, piecewise-constant zones used in its original 
configuration introduced by Bailey et al. (2020). This modification re­
flects a substantial increase in spatial resolution and parameter flexi­
bility, enabling a better representation of uncertainty in subsurface 
heterogeneity. This work expands on the traditional gwflow setup pre­
sented in Qasemipour et al. (2025) by replacing the 70 gwflow zonal 
parameters with 75,554 cell-based parameters under the new configu­
ration. The gwflow grid consists of 140 rows and 139 columns, and pa­
rameters such as aquifer hydraulic conductivity, specific yield, and 
recharge delay are defined for each of the active cells, leading to the 
substantially larger parameter set.
Since the DSI-based statistical surrogate model runs fast, it enables us 
to evaluate the ability of existing groundwater observations to reduce 
the predictive uncertainty. We approach this in two ways: (1) by 
excluding the groundwater head observations from the calibration 
dataset, then reconstructing and rerunning the DSI-based model to 
compare the resulting predictive uncertainty for predictions of interest; 
and (2) by applying linear uncertainty analysis, which uses the first- 
order second-moment (FOSM) method to propagate parameter uncer­
tainty to predictions via linearisation. Linear analysis is particularly 
valuable for assessing data worth, as it does not rely on the actual values 
of observations or parameters (White et al., 2016). Instead, it employs 
the sensitivities of model outputs to parameters, represented in the Ja­
cobian (or sensitivity) matrix, combined with the parameter covariance 
matrix, to evaluate the potential of existing or future observations to 
constrain predictions of interest.
2. Materials and methods
In this section, we describe the DSI formulation and the SWAT +
gwflow model setup. The DSI model, once constructed, is intended to 
address key limitations of the physical model, including computational 
burden and numerical instability. SWAT + gwflow is a process-based 
integrated surface – groundwater model that supports complex param­
eterisation and represents both water quantity and quality. This pro­
vides a rigorous test case for applying DSI to the prediction of time series 
of streamflow and groundwater heads.
2.1. The DSI surrogate model
The DSI formulation is briefly explained here for the readers’ con­
venience, largely following Doherty (2015). within a Bayesian frame­
work. Where further detail is needed, readers are referred to the 
mentioned reference. Suppose the action of a model on its parameters k 
is represented by Z. Then: 
h = o + ε = Z(k) + ε
(1) 
where h refers to the calibration dataset, o denotes model outputs cor­
responding to field measurements h, and ε represents the measurement 
noise (a collective term including the structural noise). Let the vector s 
contain the predictions made by the model through running it over the 
prediction period. Assuming that the model is executed N times over a 
time frame that includes both the calibration and prediction period (i.e., 
the period for which the predictions are needed). The mean of model 
outputs o and model predictions s can be represented as: 
o =
∑N
i=1oi
N
(2a) 
s =
∑N
i=1si
N
(2b) 
The prior covariance matrix between the model outputs (measured past) 
and model predictions (managed future) can be calculated as: 
C
([
s
o
] )
=
[
Css
Cso
Cos
Coo
]
(3) 
The covariance matrices Coo and Cso which describes the prior vari­
ability of model outputs are obtained empirically by running the phys­
ical model N times based on an ensemble of random realisations of 
parameters sampled from the prior parameter probability distribution.
The DSI surrogate model uses principal component analysis (PCA) 
(see Lima et al., 2020) of the covariance matrix between model outputs 
that correspond to field measurements (o) and predictions of interest (s) 
to write the vector of predicted data without the need to adjust model 
parameters. The DSI surrogate model is described by the following 
equation (Delottier et al., 2023): 
[
s
o
]
−
[
so
]
= C1/2
([
s
o
] )
x
(4) 
where the vector x contains parameters of the DSI model, the values of 
which are adjusted during model calibration. These parameters are in­
dependent normal standard variates with a prior covariance matrix 
equal to the identity matrix (i.e., C(x) = I). The square root of the 
covariance matrix in this equation is computed using the singular value 
decomposition (SVD) of the covariance matrix between model pre­
dictions and model outputs (Lima et al., 2020): 
C
([
s
o
] )
=
[
Css
Cso
Cos
Coo
]
=
[
σs
2
Cso
Cos
Coo
]
= VSVT
(5) 
where V is an orthonormal matrix and is S a diagonal matrix with non- 
zero singular values as its elements. The covariance matrix between 
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
2 
predictions and model outputs can be calculated as: 
Cso = Cos
T =
1
N −1
∑N
i=1(o −o)(s −s)T
(6) 
The square root of C
([
s
o
] )
is then computed as: 
C1/2
([
s
o
] )
= VS1/2
(7) 
Since the established DSI surrogate model fills the Coo and Cso matrices 
through model runs based on an ensemble of stochastic realisation of 
parameters sampled from the prior parameter probability distribution, 
there would be no limit to parameter complexity or the number of pa­
rameters which the physical model employs (Doherty, 2015) and limited 
only by the fidelity of the representation of correlations between the 
measured past and future predictions of interest.
The surrogate statistical model that is described in Eq. (4) can now be 
calibrated against the field measurements h to condition the expected 
value of any prediction of interest sʹ and its uncertainty σsʹ using the 
following equations (Doherty, 2015): 
sʹ = s + CsoCoo
−1(h −o)
(8a) 
σs
2ʹ = σs
2 −CsoCoo
−1Cos
(8b) 
where sʹ is the posterior mean of the prediction and σs2ʹ is the variance of 
that prediction. The square root of variance (i.e., the standard deviation, 
σsʹ) represents the uncertainty. The workflow follows the general 
approach proposed by (Kitlasten et al., 2025), adapted here for our study 
(Fig. 1)
[Insert Fig. 1].
2.2. SWAT + gwflow model setup
2.2.1. Study area and data
The Winnebago watershed (Fig. 2) was selected because it represents 
strong surface – groundwater interactions, through extensive subsurface 
tile drainage and irrigation pumping. These features provide both hy­
drologic complexity necessary to rigorously test DSI and data richness 
required for objective model evaluation.
Based on the topography, land use, and soil properties, the number of 
spatial units for this watershed is listed in Table 1.
2.2.2. SWAT + model
The SWAT + model divides each basin into sub-basins, the land areas 
within which are represented by one or more Landscape Units (LSUs). 
These LSUs are further separated into HRUs with unique combination of 
land use, soil type, and slope. The flow generated for each HRU in SWAT 
+ is summed at the LSU level and can be routed from the LSU to any 
other spatial object available within the basin such as another LSU, a 
channel, wetland, pond, reservoir, or aquifer (Bieger et al., 2019). All 
the input data necessary for setting up a SWAT + model is listed in 
Table 2.
2.2.3. Gwflow module
In the SWAT + model, as in its predecessor SWAT, a simplified 
representation of groundwater is implemented, in which groundwater 
head changes exclusively as a function of recharge and discharge to 
channels within a single aquifer object, and is not influenced by 
groundwater storage in adjacent aquifers, groundwater pumping, or 
channel stage. Therefore, Bailey et al., 2020 developed a new physically- 
based spatially-distributed groundwater flow module, gwflow, to replace 
the current aquifer module of SWAT+. The required input data for this 
module is also listed in Table 1.
This module uses a set of grid cells (user-defined size, each cell 
represents a three-dimensional section of aquifer) to simulate spatio­
temporal variations in groundwater storage and flow (Fig. S2). For each 
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the modelling workflow. Inspired by the approach presented in Kitlasten et al. (2025).
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
3 
grid cell, the stored groundwater volume is updated according to the 
inflows and outflows: 
ΔV
Δt = Qsource −Qsink ± Qlateral flow
(9) 
where ΔV refers to the variation of groundwater storage during the time 
step Δt. Qsource consists of recharge, stream seepage, and lake seepage; 
Qsink consists of groundwater evapotranspiration, saturation excess flow, 
groundwater discharge to streams, pumping, tile drainage outflow, and 
groundwater discharge to lakes; and lateral flow includes the flow be­
tween adjacent cells based on cell-specific hydraulic conductivity and 
head gradient, with the latter calculated using simulated groundwater 
head of neighbouring grid cells.
After activating the gwflow module, SWAT + simulates land surface, 
soil, and channel processes and the gwflow module is responsible for 
simulating the groundwater processes. Recharge to the grid cells is 
provided by the HRUs using geographic connections between HRUs and 
grid cells; groundwater-channel water exchange is simulated using grid 
cells that intersect channel objects; and tile drainage outflow from grid 
cells is directed to nearby channels for discharge. The readers are 
referred to Bailey et al., (2020) for detailed information of spatial 
configuration and computational approaches used in this module.
2.3. Parameterisation, calibration dataset and predictions of interest
2.3.1. Parameterisation
Simplified parameterisation can have ramifications on predictive 
uncertainty (Fienen et al., 2010; Moore and Doherty, 2005). Traditional 
gwflow parameterisation typically involves assigning uniform parameter 
values within predefined aquifer zones (Fig. 3), at a cost of not 
adequately capturing the inherent heterogeneity of subsurface systems. 
In this study, however, the source code of the gwflow module was 
modified in a way that each cell can be assigned adjustable parameters. 
The spatial distribution of several prior realisations (before model cali­
bration) is illustrated in Fig. S3 in Supplementary Information. In more 
traditional parameter perturbation-based calibration methods, allowing 
adjustable parameters describing hydraulic properties in each cell is 
computationally prohibitive and may lead to model instability. Dimen­
sional reduction methods such as pilot points (Doherty, 2003) or 
ensemble methods (White, 2018) can greatly reduce the computational 
burden, but still require numerous process model runs for each param­
eter upgrade. The parameters chosen to represent model input uncer­
tainty, from which the prior distribution of observations is generated, 
are those considered most influential in simulating surface runoff, 
percolation, evapotranspiration, and groundwater fluxes (Table 3).
Fig. 2. Digital elevation model of the study watershed with its geographic locations.
Table 1 
Watershed characteristics along with results of model discretisation.
Watershed
HUC8*
Area 
(km2)
Annual precipitation 
(mm)
# Sub- 
basin
# 
HRU
# 
Channels
# Soil 
types
Max soil profile depth 
(cm)
gwflow grid
Rows
Cols
Cell size 
(m)
Winnebago
07,080,203
1,787
880
20
4,358
437
261
229
140
139
500
*Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC) is a unique code that identifies a watershed in the USA.
Table 2 
Datasets and sources for simulating the study watersheds in the SWAT + model 
coupled to gwflow module.
Dataset
Resolution
Source
SWAT þ
model
DEM
10 m
USGS National Elevation 
Dataset (Gesch et al., 2018)
Land use
30 m
USGS National Land Cover 
Data
Soil
10 m
gSSURGO (Soil Survey Staff, 
2014.)
Climate
​
Global historical climatology 
network; PRISM
gwflow
Initial 
Groundwater 
Head
Vector points
Bailey and Alderfer, (2022)
Aquifer thickness
250
Shangguan et al., (2017)
Tile drainage
30
Valayamkunnath et al., (2020)
Aquifer properties
Vector 
polygons
Horton et al., (2017)
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
4 
2.3.2. Model calibration, prediction uncertainty, and data worth analysis
The DSI surrogate model and the physical SWAT + gwflow model 
were both calibrated using a model-independent form of iterative 
ensemble smoother, called PESTPP-IES (White, 2018), a non-linear 
method that iteratively improves parameter estimates by updating an 
ensemble of parameter sets. The ensemble smoother then adjusts each 
member of the ensemble individually to produce an approximation of 
the posterior parameter probability distribution. At the same time, the 
ensemble of evolving, random parameter fields is used repeatedly by the 
smoother to estimate sensitivities that are then used to further adjust 
individual members of the ensemble so that they provide a better fit with 
the calibration dataset. This procedure offers uncertainty quantification 
as a natural outcome of the calibration process (Chen and Oliver, 2013).
For the DSI model the adjustable parameters are the principal 
component analysis (PCA) coefficients (or weights), while in the SWAT 
+ gwflow model the adjustable parameters are the process model pa­
rameters. DSI-based model parameters x only represent observation-to- 
prediction relationships that arise from the 500 realisations of model 
outputs calculated using the stochastic realisations of 77,554 parameters 
used in the physical SWAT + gwflow model. In other words, only 500 
SWAT + gwflow model runs were used to establish the correlation be­
tween model outputs and model predictions to construct the DSI sur­
rogate model, based on 500 realisations of 77,554 model parameters. No 
further SWAT + gwflow simulations were needed for model calibration 
or uncertainty quantification of the DSI surrogate model.
Doherty (2025) explains that the number of realisations should 
exceed the dimensionality of the solution space, ensuring that each 
parameter field emerging from the iterative ensemble smoother process 
has roughly the same projection onto this space as the true parameter 
field, and that the dimensionality of this space is commensurate with the 
size of the calibration dataset. Using 500 realisations in this study pro­
vided an ensemble size greater than the number of observations, sup­
porting stable covariance estimation and helping to reduce spurious 
correlations. In more detail, Kitlasten et al (2022) showed that ensem­
bles comprising a few hundred realisations were sufficient to span the 
calibration solution space, whereas smaller ensembles led to rank- 
deficient Jacobians, predictive bias, and higher predictive failure 
rates. Due to the high number of realisations compared to observations, 
the correlation matrix used for DSI (Coo in Eq. (3) is assumed to be well- 
conditioned.
The dataset used for model calibration includes 84 monthly 
streamflow values (2002–2008) from one gauging station and 33 
groundwater head observations from eight wells (see Fig. S1). The 16- 
year simulation period included seven years (2002–2008) for model 
calibration, seven years (2009–2015) for model validation of streamflow 
and groundwater heads, and two years (2000–2001) for warm-up. 
Streamflow and groundwater head values were predicted for the 
period 2009–2015 to evaluate the performance of DSI surrogate model 
and the physical SWAT + gwflow model by comparing the predictions 
with corresponding field measurements.
To each flow and head observation, a random realisation of obser­
vation noise was added. The observation noise follows a normal distri­
bution with a mean of 0.0 and a standard deviation of 0.1 times the flow 
value (in m3/s) for streamflow, and 0.1 m for groundwater heads. Fig. S3
in Supplementary Information depicts several parameter realisations for 
aquifer hydraulic conductivity following the prior parameter probability 
distribution.
Different statistical indices such as the Nash-Sutcliffe Efficiency 
(NSE), Percent Bias (PBIAS), Kling-Gupta Efficiency (KGE), and Coeffi­
cient of Determination (R2) are used to evaluate the performance of the 
model in estimating the streamflow. These indices are expressed by Eqs. 
(10)–(13), where Qoi and Qsi are the observed and simulated streamflow 
for the ith time step, respectively. Qo and Qs are the average observed 
and simulated streamflow values. NSE places more weight on larger 
errors (i.e., sensitive to high peaks), being useful for evaluating how well 
Fig. 3. Aquifer hydraulic conductivity represented with piecewise-constant homogeneous zones extended over the study area in the old configuration of the 
gwflow module.
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
5 
the model simulates the timing and magnitude of peaks. R2 reflects how 
well the observed and simulated values are linearly correlated. PBIAS 
evaluates how accurately the model simulates the average magnitudes 
for the model outputs, helping to identify over- or underpredictions 
(Moriasi et al., 2015). KGE decomposes model performance into corre­
lation (r, correlation coefficient between observed and simulated flow), 
bias (β, defined as μsim
μobs, where μ is the mean), and variability (γ, defined as 
σsim
σobs, where σ is the standard deviation), providing a balanced evaluation 
of model performance when high variability is a concern. 
NSE = 1 −
∑n
i=1(Qoi −Qsi)2
∑n
i=1(Qoi −Qo)2
(10) 
PBIAS =
∑n
i=1(Qoi −Qsi)
∑n
i=1Qoi
× 100
(11) 
KGE = 1 −
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(r −1)2 + (β −1)2 + (γ −1)2
√
(12) 
R2 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
∑n
i=1(Qoi
−Qo)(Qsi −Qs)
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n
i=1
(Qoi−Qo)2
√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑
n
i=1
Qsi−Qs)2
√
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
2
(13) 
The annual groundwater head simulated by the gwflow module was 
Table 3 
Description of parameters used in the physical model (SWAT + gwflow) to 
generate the prior observation ensemble required by DSI.
Model
Parameter
Description 
(unit)
Impacted 
processes
Parameter 
range
SWAT+
CN2
SCS runoff curve 
number for 
moisture 
condition II
Surface runoff
31–95
can_max
Maximum canopy 
storage (mm)
Surface runoff 
PET 
AET 
PercolationLateral 
flow calculations
0.01–100
esco
Soil evaporation 
compensation 
factor
0.001–1.0
epco
Plant uptake 
compensation 
factor
0.001–1.0
perco
Percolation 
coefficient
0.001–1.0
lat_ttime
Lateral flow 
travel time (days)
0.05–35
bd
Moist bulk 
density (g/cm3)
Soil water processes
0.65–1.95
awc
Available water 
capacity (mm/ 
mm)
0.01–1
sk
Saturated 
hydraulic 
conductivity 
(mm/hr)
0.005–900
surq_lag
Surface runoff lag 
coefficient
Surface runoff
0.05–50
ovnh1
Manning’s 
roughness 
coefficient
Surface runoff
0.01–1.0
ftmp
Snowfall 
temperature (◦C)
Snow processes
−5–5
mtmp
Snowmelt base 
temperature (◦C)
−5–5
mmax
Melt factor for 
snow on June 21 
(mm/◦C– day)
1.4–6.9
mmin
Melt factor for 
snow on 
December 21 
(mm/◦C– day)
1.4–6.9
tmplag
Snowpack 
temperature lag 
factor
0.01–1.01
snowd
Minimum snow 
water content 
(mm)
0.5–1.0
COV50
Fraction of 
COVMX
0.1–1
ch_n
Manning’s n for 
the main 
channels
Channel flow 
processes
0.01–0.3
ch_k
Effective 
hydraulic 
conductivity of 
the main 
channels (mm/h)
0.001–500
dp
Depth of drain 
tube from the soil 
surface (mm)
Tile drainage
​
t_fc
Time to drain soil 
to field capacity 
(h)
​
lag
Drain tile lag time 
(h)
​
dist
Distance between 
two drain tubes 
or tiles (m)
​
drain
Drainage 
coefficient (mm/ 
day)
​
Table 3 (continued)
Model 
Parameter 
Description 
(unit) 
Impacted 
processes 
Parameter 
range
lat_k
Multiplication 
factor to 
determine lateral 
saturated 
hydraulic 
conductivity
​
gwflow
slp_len
Average slope 
length for erosion 
(m)
Time of 
concentration 
processes
10–150
lat_len
Average slope 
length for lateral 
subsurface flow 
(m)
10–150
tile_depth
Depth of tiles 
below ground 
surface (m)
Groundwater fluxes
1–2
tile_area
Area of 
groundwater 
inflow (m2) to tile
10–100
tile_k
Hydraulic 
conductivity of 
the drain 
perimeter (m/ 
day)
0.5–15
wt_depth
Water table depth 
(m)
0.5–50
r
Recharge delay 
(days)
1.0–30
kaqu
Aquifer hydraulic 
conductivity (m/ 
day)
8.6E- 
08–––15
syaqu
Aquifer specific 
yield (m3/m3)
0.05–0.35
bed_k
Streambed 
hydraulic 
conductivity (m/ 
day)
5E- 
06–––0.1
bed_thick
Streambed 
thickness (m)
0.1–1.5
bed_depth
Vertical distance 
of streambed 
below the DEM 
value (m)
1–8
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
6 
evaluated using the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), which is the absolute 
difference between observed and simulated groundwater heads: 
MAE = 1
n
∑
n
i=1
⃒⃒Hobs,i −Hsim,i
⃒⃒
(14) 
where Hobs,i the observed groundwater head at time i, Hsim,i is the 
simulated groundwater head at the same time, and n is the total number 
of observations.
Furthermore, in addition to these deterministic metrics, we used 
Prediction Interval Coverage Probability (PICP) and Mean Prediction 
Interval Width (MPIW) indices to probabilistically evaluate the predic­
tive performance of DSI and the physical model (Eqs. (15) and (16)). 
PICP represents the fraction of observations that fall within the modelled 
prediction interval. MPIW measures the average width of the prediction 
interval and reflects the sharpness of the uncertainty bounds. A desirable 
uncertainty interval is associated with high PICP and low MPIW. 
PICP = 1
n
∑
n
i=1
I
[
Qi,lower ≤Qi ≤Qi,upper
]
(15) 
MPIW = 1
n
∑
n
i=1
(Qi,lower −Qi,upper)
(16) 
where n is the total number of observations, Qi is the observed value, 
and Qi,lower and Qi,upper are the lower and upper bounds of the uncertainty 
interval for the ith observation, respectively. I[.] is the indicator function, 
which equals one if the condition inside the bracket is true, and zero 
otherwise.
Given the computational efficiency of the DSI-based model, we 
assessed the worth of observation data in reducing the predictive un­
certainty in two ways: (1) excluding the groundwater head observations 
during the DSI-based model calibration, and (2) using linear analysis 
(also known as FOSM; (Doherty, 2015; White et al., 2016)). Linear 
analysis was performed using the GENLINPRED PEST utility that runs a 
suite of analyses based on a single PEST control file and its 
accompanying Jacobian (.jco) matrix. It quantifies data worth by: (1) 
calculating the increase in posterior predictive uncertainty variance 
when each calibration observation is individually excluded from con­
ditioning a prediction, and (2) calculating the reduction in prior pre­
dictive uncertainty when each observation is used alone to condition 
that prediction (i.e., it is the sole member of the calibration dataset).
It is important to note that: (1) unlike the physical model where the 
Jacobian reflects the sensitivity of observations (simulated equivalents) 
to parameters, the DSI models’ Jacobian reflects the sensitivity of 
observation-prediction correlations, and (2) the Jacobian calculated by 
PESTPP-IES is empirical and, therefore, not suited for linear-based 
analysis. As such, we used PEST to generate a new perturbation-based 
Jacobian for use in GENLINPRED.
3. Results
3.1. SWAT + gwflow performance in estimating surface and groundwater 
fluxes
The performance of the SWAT + gwflow model in simulating the 
monthly streamflow for the Winnebago watershed is evaluated using the 
statistical metrices NSE, PBIAS, R2, and KGE (Fig. 4). The samples of the 
prior probability distribution of 77,554 model parameters are iteratively 
adjusted during the model calibration period (2000–2008) using 
PESTPP-IES for three iterations. The predictions for 2009–2020 are 
taken directly from the posterior observation ensemble obtained 
through calibration, with the spread across 500 realisations representing 
prediction uncertainty.
The results show that model-simulated streamflow at the gauging 
station within the watershed closely matches the field measurements 
during both calibration (Fig. 4B) and prediction (Fig. 4D) periods. The 
PBIAS improved from 14.3% during the calibration period (Fig. 4B) to 
1.7% during the prediction period (Fig. 4D). This suggests that the 
calibrated parameter values can consistently reproduce system behav­
iour beyond the calibration period. The flow variability represented by 
the ensemble spread is reduced substantially, reflecting the reduced 
Fig. 4. Observed streamflow simulated by the SWAT + gwflow (physical) model for both calibration (A and B) and prediction (C and D) periods. A/C and B/D 
represent the prior (before calibration) and posterior (after calibration) time series, respectively. The variability of simulated/predicted values is shown as the 
uncertainty (blue ribbon). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
7 
uncertainty after model calibration (Fig. 4B and 4D). This implies that 
the calibration dataset comprised of streamflow and groundwater head 
observations provides sufficient information to constrain the model for 
this specific prediction (i.e., predictions of streamflow). The posterior 
distributions for both the calibration (Fig. S5) and prediction (Fig. 5) 
periods capture the measured values.
For groundwater head calculations, however, the ensemble of 
physical model realisations generated from the posterior parameter 
distribution obtained via PESTPP-IES-based calibration did not consis­
tently capture the measured values during either the calibration 
(Fig. S6) or prediction (Fig. 6) periods.
3.2. DSI model performance in estimating surface and groundwater fluxes
The monthly streamflow estimates from the DSI-based statistical 
surrogate model exhibits good to very good performance for both the 
calibration and prediction periods (Fig. 9B and 9D), based on the sta­
tistical evaluation criteria reported by Moriasi et al., (2015). However, it 
should be noted that, the physical model captures flow variations 
marginally better as reflected in higher/smaller values of NSE/PBIAS. 
For streamflow, the DSI model achieved a higher PICP than the physical 
model, indicating that observed values were more consistently captured 
within the predictive intervals. However, the MPIW of the DSI model 
(9.19) exceeded that of the physical model (5.92), reflecting wider un­
certainty bounds associated with this improved coverage. These prob­
abilistic metrics were not computed for groundwater head estimates 
because the available head data were temporally sparse and did not form 
continuous time series suitable for PICP and MPIW estimation.
The DSI surrogate model parameters were iteratively adjusted using 
PESTPP-IES, following the same approach used to calibrate the physical 
model parameters. It must be noted that the very good statistical metrics 
calculated during the calibration period for the DSI model (Fig. 7B) 
results from the surrogate model formulation rather than overfitting of 
the physical SWAT + gwflow parameters. The DSI surrogate model is 
constructed based on the empirical correlations between observations 
(past) and predictions (future) and is directly conditioned on observed 
streamflow during calibration. As a result, it reproduces the calibration 
observations almost exactly, leading to a near-perfect model perfor­
mance metrics. Importantly, calibration is applied to the DSI surrogate 
model in data space rather than adjustment of the full set of physical 
model parameters.
The period 2000–2008 served as the calibration period, and 
2009–2020 as the prediction period. Predictive uncertainty is repre­
sented by the ensemble of 500 model realisations generated from the 
posterior DSI model parameter distribution obtained via PESTPP-IES 
after 5 iterations.
The histograms of streamflow prediction samples before (Fig. S7) 
and after (Fig. 8) model calibration (i.e., prior and posterior ensembles, 
respectively) show that the field measurements are almost perfectly 
captured by the ensemble spread. That is, the observed values lie close to 
the mean of the posterior predictive probability distribution, an 
outcome that was not the case with the physical SWAT + gwflow model 
(see Figs. 5 and 6).
Unlike the physical model calibrated with iES, the calibrated DSI- 
based statistical surrogate model was able to capture the observed 
groundwater head values within the corresponding uncertainty ranges 
for both the calibration (Fig. S8) and prediction (Fig. 9) periods. It is also 
important to note that calibrating the DSI-based statistical surrogate 
model was approximately 13 times quicker than that of the physical 
SWAT + gwflow model, using the same virtual machine (AMD EPYC 
7F72 @ 3.19 GHz) with 20 virtual processors, 48 GB of RAM, and 500 
realisations (Table 4). Although individual DSI model runs take only a 
fraction of a second, the overall speed-up can be adversely affected by 
updating large PEST control and output files (~10 GB), containing 
Fig. 5. Prior and posterior distributions of physical model (SWAT + gwflow) predictions of streamflow (m3/s) for specific times during the prediction period 
(2009–2020). The red line represents the field measurement for that time of the year. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
8 
simulated values for every grid cell, as was the case in this study. In 
applications where only a subset of model outputs is required, and such 
extensive file updates are unnecessary, DSI calibration could be orders of 
magnitude faster than calibration of the physical model.
Following validation against groundwater head estimates for the 
prediction period (2009–2020), spatial distribution of groundwater 
head (Fig. 10) and associated prediction uncertainty (Fig. 11) for the 
calibration period (2000–2008) were derived directly from the same 
posterior ensemble of the DSI model. For the spatial variations of 
groundwater head and the associated prediction uncertainty for the 
Fig. 6. Prior and posterior distributions of physical model (SWAT + gwflow) predictions of groundwater head (m) for specific times during the prediction period 
(2009–2020). The red line represents the field measurement for that time of the year. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 7. Observed streamflow simulated by the DSI statistical surrogate model for both calibration (A and B) and prediction (C and D) periods. A/C and B/D represent 
the prior (before calibration) and posterior (after calibration) time series, respectively. The variability of simulated/predicted values is shown as the uncertainty (blue 
ribbon). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
9 
prediction period (2009–2020), see Figs. S9 and S10
in the 
Supplementary Information.
Fig. 8. Prior and posterior distributions of the DSI statistical surrogate model predictions of streamflow (m3/s) for specific times during the prediction period 
(2009–2020). The red line represents the field measurement for that time of the year. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 9. Prior and posterior distributions of the DSI statistical surrogate model predictions of groundwater head (m) for specific times during the prediction period 
(2009–2020). The red line represents the field measurement for that time of the year. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
10 
3.3. Worth of calibration dataset
3.3.1. Dsi-based data worth analysis
Given the computational efficiency of the DSI-based model, we used 
PESTPP-IES to sample the posterior distribution of groundwater head 
predictions after excluding all groundwater head observations from the 
calibration dataset in order to assess the worth of groundwater obser­
vations for constraining prediction uncertainty. Excluding these obser­
vations contributed to increased predictive uncertainty in groundwater 
head estimates (Fig. 12). The impact of excluding groundwater obser­
vations was, as expected, more pronounced in areas close to the obser­
vation well locations.
Omission of groundwater observations from the calibration dataset 
show: (1) the exclusion of groundwater observations led to increased 
predictive uncertainty, as reflected by a wider spread in the predictions, 
and (2) groundwater head predictions were less reliably captured within 
the ensemble spread, with observed values either falling outside the 
uncertainty range or lying far from the mean of the posterior predictive 
distribution. This highlights the critical role of groundwater observa­
tions in constraining model predictions of groundwater head. (See 
Fig. 13).
3.3.2. Linear analysis-based data worth analysis
We, somewhat arbitrarily, selected a prediction of groundwater head 
in a cell in the central northern part of the model (cell 14517, see Fig. S1) 
to demonstrate the practicality of the linear analysis method in data 
worth evaluation. In real-world applications, the prediction location 
could be any cell of strategic interest to decision makers. The percent 
increase in posterior predictive uncertainty, calculated using the GEN­
LINPRED utility of the PEST suite, indicates the omission of streamflow 
data results in the greatest increase in predictive uncertainty of 
groundwater head. This highlights the importance of including flow 
observations in groundwater problems even when the prediction of in­
terest is head. Individual groundwater head observations, however, 
provide less reduction in uncertainty of head predictions (Table 5). 
Furthermore, 
the 
omission 
of 
observation 
wells 
USGS 
414728094385301 and USGS 413958094544501 (see Fig. S1) from the 
existing monitoring network resulted in a slightly greater increase in 
predictive uncertainty (0.67%) compared to the exclusion of other wells 
(nearly 0.0%). This outcome is expected, as these two wells are located 
upstream and in close proximity to the prediction location of interest 
(Cell_14517; see Fig. S1), thus having a stronger influence on the 
prediction.
The contribution of monthly streamflow observations to reducing 
predictive uncertainty in groundwater head estimates is assessed by 
Table 4 
Calibration run times for calibrating the SWAT + gwflow and DSI-based surro­
gate models using PESTPP-IES.
Watershed (Area)
SWAT + gwflow(minutes)
DSI model(minutes)
Winnebago River (1787 km2)
1113.8
83.2
Note: 
Three iterations were used for the physical SWAT + gwflow model and five for the 
DSI-based statistical surrogate model.
Fig. 10. Simulated annual average of groundwater head across the model domain during the calibration period (2000–2008), using the DSI-based surrogate model.
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
11 
treating each streamflow observation as the only member of the cali­
bration dataset (Fig. S11 in Supplementary Information).
4. Discussion
This study demonstrates the use of Data space inversion (DSI) for 
making predictions and quantifying their associated uncertainties. 
Traditional uncertainty analysis methods can become computationally 
intensive as model complexity increases. Moreover, numerical insta­
bility often arises in models with complex parameterisation schemes as 
parameter values are adjusted to improve the fits between model results 
and real-world measurement, further complicating the analysis. The 
new configuration of the gwflow module enables a cell-based parame­
terisation approach, which allows more flexible parameterisation and 
representation of subsurface complexity. This new cell-based parame­
terisation approach is particularly valuable in data worth analysis, 
where the suitability or efficiency of one location for a potential moni­
toring site is compared to another nearby location (Fienen et al., 2010). 
DSI is formulated to implicitly take into account the complexity of the 
original model through conditioning the predictions of future system 
behaviour by measurements of past system behaviour.
The predictions generated by the DSI-based statistical surrogate 
model are reasonably well captured within the ensemble spread quan­
tified using PESTPP-IES. This indicates the model’s reliability in making 
predictions that align with the imperatives of decision-support model­
ling. This can be explained by the fact that relationships between ob­
servations (historical measurements) and predictions are generally less 
nonlinear than those between observations and the physical model pa­
rameters. Consequently, DSI tends to provide more stable and reliable 
estimates of posterior predictive means and variances than the physi­
cally based model (Kitlasten et al., 2025). This finding is consistent with 
previous applications of DSI in groundwater systems, where DSI- 
produced uncertainty intervals demonstrated better agreement with 
observations that the physically based model (e.g., Delottier et al., 
2023). Similarly, Kitlasten et al. (2025) applied the DSI approach to 
MODFLOW 6 and MODPATH for predicting groundwater head, 
streamflow, and groundwater age. In that study, the fits between the 
DSI-based model outputs and field measurements were comparable to 
those achieved by the numerically calibrated model using ensemble 
space inversion (ENSI).
In contrast to the DSI-based statistical surrogate model, the posterior 
uncertainty in groundwater head predictions, derived after calibrating 
the physical SWAT + gwflow model with PESTPP-IES, was relatively 
narrow, resulting in the observed groundwater heads falling outside the 
ensemble spread. The relationship between observations (simulated 
equivalents) and model parameters can be nonlinear and complicated by 
parameter correlation, whereas the relationship between observations 
(simulated equivalents) and predictions (simulated equivalents) often 
allow a more direct transfer of information from observations to pre­
dictions. This suggests that predictions based on calibrated physical 
model parameters may have higher uncertainty due to model instability 
and/or non-linearities, potentially due to a loss of continuity as the 
calibration process progresses (Delottier et al., 2023).
Our results indicated that the worth of calibration data in reducing 
Fig. 11. Spatial variation of uncertainty in groundwater head predictions (Q95-Q5) from the DSI-based model for 2000–2008.
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
12 
the predictive uncertainty is prediction specific. In the Winnebago 
watershed, groundwater head observations located near the prediction 
location contributed most to reducing predictive uncertainty in 
groundwater head. The streamflow time series also provided substantial 
constraint, reflecting integrated surface – groundwater interactions 
across the watershed. Together, these findings provide useful guidance 
regarding the optimal design of monitoring networks that would yield 
the highest reductions in uncertainty of the predictions of interest.
In a broader context, the data worth analysis highlights that the 
usefulness of the calibration data set depends not only on its quantity, 
but on how well that dataset describes system behaviour as it relates to 
the prediction of interest. This mindset supports the shift from using all 
data for calibration toward prediction-driven data gathering and 
monitoring network design.
4.1. Future research directions
DSI and associated linear uncertainty analysis approaches allow 
gaining insights regarding the worth of calibration data set in reducing 
the predictive uncertainty without repeated parameter adjustments 
through calibrating the physical model. It, therefore, enables rapid 
assessment of alternative monitoring strategies providing practical 
framework for (1) evaluating the potential value of yet-to-be-gathered 
data, and (2) assessing the individual worth of existing groundwater 
head observation in reducing predictive uncertainty. Such analyses 
could directly support stakeholders and water resource managers in 
Fig. 12. Spatial distribution of increased predictive uncertainty in groundwater 
head estimates for the year 2020, resulting from the exclusion of groundwater 
observations from the calibration dataset.
Fig. 13. Prior and posterior distributions of the groundwater head predictions (m) for specific times during the prediction period (2009–2020) following exclusion of 
groundwater observations from the calibration dataset. The red line represents the field measurement for that time of the year. (For interpretation of the references to 
colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 5 
Variance increase of the groundwater head prediction for the cell number 
14,517 incurred by omission of each observation well from the calibration 
dataset.
Omitted observation
Variance increase (%)
Streamflow observation (USGS 05459500)
5.77
Well USGS 430159093403201
0.01
Well USGS 414818092055401
0.00
Well USGS 420018091430801
0.13
Well USGS 414315091252001
0.00
Well USGS 422214093271602
0.05
Well USGS 414728094385301
0.67
Well USGS 413958094544501
0.23
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
13 
designing more efficient and cost-effective monitoring networks. 
Moreover, given the low computational burden of the DSI approach, it is 
well suited for large-scale applications, such as optimising nationwide 
hydrological monitoring networks, where traditional ensemble-based 
calibration methods may be infeasible.
4.2. Limitations of the DSI surrogate model
Despite its advantages, DSI also has limitations. First, it is susceptible 
to prior data conflict, where model outputs calculated from prior 
parameter ensemble are inconsistent with observed data. In such cases, 
some measurements cannot be used to condition the observation- 
prediction covariance matrix on which DSI relies. Second, when DSI is 
constructed using a finite number of realisations, spurious correlations 
between observations and predictions may arise, which can manifest as 
temporal or spatial noise in some predictions. Third, although DSI can 
indicate wide uncertainty intervals for management-relevant pre­
dictions, it cannot identify the specific parameter fields responsible for 
these outcomes, which can make interpretation of undesirable conse­
quences difficult. For further discussion of these limitations, readers are 
referred to Doherty (2025).
5. Conclusion
In this study, we evaluated the performance of the data space 
inversion (DSI) approach in predicting streamflow and groundwater 
head, as well as in reducing the posterior uncertainty associated with 
these predictions. DSI was employed as a statistical surrogate model for 
the SWAT + model coupled with a modified groundwater flow module 
(gwflow), which enabled cell-based parameterisation to better represent 
the spatial heterogeneity of subsurface properties. This study also 
evaluated the worth of calibration dataset in constraining posterior 
predictive uncertainty.
In conclusion: 
• Calibrating the DSI-based statistical surrogate model using PESTPP- 
IES took approximately 83 min for five iterations (~ 16.5 min per 
iteration), compared to the approximately 1,113 min taken to cali­
brate the physical SWAT + gwflow for three iterations (~ 222.6 min 
per iteration). This highlights the efficiency of the proposed 
approach.
• Following the PESTPP-IES-based calibration, the DSI-based statisti­
cal surrogate model outperformed the SWAT + gwflow model in 
simulating streamflow and groundwater heads during both calibra­
tion and prediction periods, highlighting its strength for decision- 
support modelling.
• Streamflow predictions from the DSI-based model were closer to the 
mean of the posterior predictive distributions than those from the 
physical model calibrated with PESTPP-IES, suggesting higher pre­
dictive reliability.
• Unlike the physical model calibrated with PESTPP-IES, the posterior 
predictive distribution generated by the DSI-based statistical surro­
gate model encompassed the observed groundwater head values 
during both calibration and prediction periods.
• Excluding groundwater head observations from the calibration 
dataset resulted in increased predictive uncertainty, particularly in 
areas near the omitted observation wells. Groundwater head pre­
dictions in these areas became less reliable, often falling outside the 
corresponding uncertainty ranges or lying far from the mean of the 
posterior predictive distribution. This highlights the importance of 
using calibration data that is well aligned with the predictions of 
interest (e.g., head observations when predicting head).
The results show that DSI can provide reliable predictive uncertainty 
estimates at a fraction of the computational cost of a physically based 
model, allowing decision-makers to explore different management 
scenarios more efficiently, and design monitoring networks in a 
prediction-focused manner. Methodologically, this work demonstrates 
how DSI can be coupled with an integrated surface – groundwater hy­
drologic model to generate robust, prediction-focused uncertainty esti­
mates in a fraction of a second.
Funding sources
Ehsan Qasemipour acknowledges the financial support provided by 
the University of Canterbury PhD scholarship. Wesley Kitlasten was 
supported by the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences (GNS) 
Science Groundwater Strategic Science Investment Fund (SSIF).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ehsan Qasemipour: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. Wesley Kitlasten: Writing – review & 
editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Ryan T. Bailey: Writing – re­
view & editing, Software, Data curation. Markus Pahlow: Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Thomas A. 
Cochrane: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding 
acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.135028.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Bailey, R., Alderfer, C., 2022. Groundwater Data in Unconfined Aquifers-conterminous 
United States. figshare. Collection.
Bailey, R.T., Bieger, K., Arnold, J.G., Bosch, D.D., 2020. A new physically-based spatially- 
distributed groundwater flow module for SWAT+. Hydrology 7, 1–23. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/hydrology7040075.
Bailey, R.T., Bieger, K., Flores, L., Tomer, M., 2022. Evaluating the contribution of 
subsurface drainage to watershed water yield using SWAT+ with groundwater 
modeling. Sci. Total Environ. 802, 149962. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2021.149962.
Bhattacharjee, J., Marttila, H., Molina Navarro, E., Kløve, B., 2024. Application of SWAT 
to assess peatland forestry impacts on water quality. Hydrol. Res.
Bieger, K., Arnold, J.G., Rathjens, H., White, M.J., Bosch, D.D., Allen, P.M., 2019. 
Representing the connectivity of upland areas to floodplains and streams in SWAT+. 
J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 55, 578–590. https://doi.org/10.1111/1752- 
1688.12728.
Chen, Y., Oliver, D.S., 2013. Levenberg-Marquardt forms of the iterative ensemble 
smoother for efficient history matching and uncertainty quantification. Comput. 
Geosci. 17, 689–703. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596-013-9351-5.
Delottier, H., Doherty, J., Brunner, P., 2023. Data space inversion for efficient 
uncertainty quantification using an integrated surface and sub-surface hydrologic 
model. Geosci. Model Dev. 16, 4213–4231. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-16-4213- 
2023.
Doherty, J., 2015. Calibration and uncertainty analysis for complex environmental 
models. Watermark Numerical Computing Brisbane, Australia. 
Fienen, M.N., Doherty, J.E., Hunt, R.J., Reeves, H.W., 2010. Using prediction uncertainty 
analysis to design hydrologic monitoring networks: Example applications from the 
Great Lakes water availability pilot project. US Geological Survey.
Fleckenstein, J.H., Krause, S., Hannah, D.M., Boano, F., 2010. Groundwater-surface 
water interactions: New methods and models to improve understanding of processes 
and dynamics. Adv. Water Resour. 33, 1291–1295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
advwatres.2010.09.011.
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
14 
Gesch, D., Evans, G., Oimoen, M., Arundel, S., 2018. The National elevation dataset. In: 
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing. American Society for 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Bethesda, MD, pp. 83–110.
Horton, J.D., San Juan, C.A., Stoeser, D.B., 2017. The state geologic map compilation 
(SGMC) geodatabase of the conterminous United States. US Geological Survey.
Kirschbaum, M.U.F., Watt, M.S., 2011. Use of a process-based model to describe spatial 
variation in Pinus radiata productivity in new zealand. For. Ecol. Manage. 262, 
1008–1019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2011.05.036.
Kitlasten, W., Moore, C., Doherty, J., 2025. Exploring the use of new data assimilation 
technologies to map groundwater quality vulnerability in a large alluvial aquifer. 
Front. Earth Sci. 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2025.1609778.
Kitlasten, W., Moore, C.R., Hemmings, B., 2022. Model structure and ensemble size: 
Implications for predictions of groundwater age. Front. Earth Sci. 10, 972305. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2022.972305.
Lewandowski, J., Meinikmann, K., Krause, S., 2020. Groundwater-surface water 
interactions: recent advances and interdisciplinary challenges. Water (switzerland) 
12, 296. https://doi.org/10.3390/w12010296.
Lima, M.M., Emerick, A.A., Ortiz, C.E.P., 2020. Data-space inversion with ensemble 
smoother. Comput. Geosci. 24, 1179–1200. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596-020- 
09933-w.
Moore, C., Doherty, J., 2005. Role of the calibration process in reducing model predictive 
error. Water Resour. Res. 41.
Moriasi, D.N., Gitau, M.W., Pai, N., Daggupati, P., 2015. Hydrologic and water quality 
models: Performance measures and evaluation criteria. Trans. ASABE 58, 
1763–1785. https://doi.org/10.13031/trans.58.10715.
Ntona, M.M., Busico, G., Mastrocicco, M., Kazakis, N., 2022. Modeling groundwater and 
surface water interaction: an overview of current status and future challenges. Sci. 
Total Environ. 846, 157355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.157355.
Qasemipour, E., Kitlasten, W., White, J.T., Pahlow, M., Bailey, R.T., Cochrane, T.A., 
Altaner, C., Abbas, S.A., 2025. Quantifying the predictive consequences of model 
parameter simplification in a SWAT+ model coupled with a groundwater module 
(gwflow). Hydrol. Sci. J. 70, 2433–2450. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02626667.2025.2537852.
Shangguan, W., Hengl, T., Mendes de Jesus, J., Yuan, H., Dai, Y., 2017. Mapping the 
global depth to bedrock for land surface modeling. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. 9, 
65–88. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016MS000686.
Soil Survey Staff, 12th ed, 2014. . USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Washington DC.
Sun, W., Durlofsky, L.J., 2017. A New Data-Space Inversion Procedure for Efficient 
Uncertainty Quantification in Subsurface Flow Problems. Math. Geosci. 49, 
679–715. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11004-016-9672-8.
Valayamkunnath, P., Barlage, M., Chen, F., Gochis, D.J., Franz, K.J., 2020. Mapping of 
30-meter resolution tile-drained croplands using a geospatial modeling approach. 
Sci. Data 7, 257. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-00596-x.
White, J.T., 2018. A model-independent iterative ensemble smoother for efficient 
history-matching and uncertainty quantification in very high dimensions. Environ 
Model Softw. 109, 191–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.06.009.
White, J.T., Fienen, M.N., Doherty, J.E., 2016. A python framework for environmental 
model uncertainty analysis. Environ Model Softw. 85, 217–228. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.08.017.
Winter, T.C., 1999. Relation of streams, lakes, and wetlands to groundwater flow 
systems. Hydrgeol. J. 7, 28–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s100400050178.
Xiao, Y., Zhang, Y., Yang, H., Wang, L., Han, J., Hao, Q., Wang, J., Zhao, Z., Hu, W., 
Wang, S., Fan, Q., Qi, Z., 2024. Interaction regimes of surface water and 
groundwater in a hyper-arid endorheic watershed on Tibetan Plateau: Insights from 
multi-proxy data. J. Hydrol. 644, 132020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhydrol.2024.132020.
Zhang, X., Qi, Y., Li, H., Wang, X., Yin, Q., 2024. Assessing the response of non-point 
source nitrogen pollution to land use change based on SWAT model. Ecol. Ind. 158, 
111391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2023.111391.
E. Qasemipour et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Journal of Hydrology 668 (2026) 135028 
15 
